Koto. Welcome to the DNA select committee
this morning. And before we start, can I say thank you very much for the
information that you sent over. I had a good look at that
last night, as I'm sure everybody else has done as well, and this is a helpful
size as well. So
thank you for that, and thank you for your attendance here.
We have 75 minutes with you today, split over the two
sessions. Unfortunately, that's the way that that had to go.
Yeah.
But I understand that you have a presentation to make first, a short one.
So I'm going to hand to you, and then I'll be opening up for questions from
members. I should say it's good to see you again.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair, and kio koto members and committee
today. So Fire and Emergency welcomes this inquiry, and we thank
the committee for the time to appear today.
I have with me my Chief Executive, Kerry Gregory, to help answer some questions.
To the right, Deputy Chief Executive Megan Stifler, who can help us
with our fleet deployment processes.
And on my left, CFO Darrell Purdy for all things financial.
We are here today to provide a detailed view of the state of our fleet, its
past and its present state.
We will bring you some more detail on maintenance at the next appearance, and we
can take some high-level appearance discussions today, but we are primarily
focused on the fleet at this time. We also know that you're particularly
concerned about the Type Threes. You've also asked us questions on the
wider fleet, and the pack in front of you provides the full picture of all
of that fleet.
And I'd like to set the scene to help you understand the material and frame up some
of the issues that are involved.
But firstly, let's acknowledge our paid and volunteer firefighters.
And in the year to June 2025, our crews attended
88,805 incidents across the country.
The purpose of our fleet is simple, getting our crews to those emergencies
quickly and safely, and we understand the frustration when an appliance
breaks down or is unavailable, which is why we aspire to bring the average
age of our fleet down.
I also want to acknowledge that some previous answers to the committee have
created confusion. There was never any intention to mislead,
but some of our answers were incomplete, incorrect, or unclear,
and some of our technical terms were not properly explained.
For that, we apologize. Today, our aim is to provide the
clearest factual picture that we can.
There are three points I would just like to emphasize.
First, the operating reality.
Fire and Emergency operate one of New Zealand's largest heavy fleets.
It's specialized, nationally dispersed, and operates in more than
600 sites.
When Fire and Emergency was established in 2017, it inherited a
complex and aged fleet environment.
This is not an excuse, but it is an important context.
Since Fire and Emergency was established, more than 300 appliances have
been put on the run after going through checks and crew training.
The second point is safety.
We know the impact of outages. To provide some
reassurance, last year across those 88,000 deployments,
there were 246 incidents that involved an unplanned
outage that kept an appliance from attending.
But when that does happen, we have a range of network and
operational responses that can manage the situation, and Megan can help
us answer some of those questions on that later.The third
point is transparency and improvement.
There are positive fleet stories.
A renewal across several of our appliance types and rebuilding the rural fleet is a
positive story. But the focus now is understandably on the Type
3s and the Aerials.
For our Type 3s, we accept that there have been serious delays.
On our Aerials, the age profile is a concern.
Our response to these challenges has been to strengthen our governance and
reporting, tighter tracking, better information, and additional
independent reassurance for the management and the board.
But we see this inquiry as an opportunity to help improve the
transparency between the committee and Fire and Emergency for future
decision-making. So Madam Chair, we are here in that spirit today,
open, factual, constructive. We agree with the need to
reduce the age of our fleet, whilst recognizing that we do have funding
constraints. And we want to give the committee reassurance that Fire and Emergency
is serious about the work. So thank you for the brief opening, and we'll now hand
back to you for questions.
Thank you, Rebecca. I'm going to go straight away to the first
question from Tim.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Board Chair, Commander, and team
for fronting. So, I think over the course of the next few weeks, there are
obviously going to be a number of questions about the fleet of appliances we have,
suitability, can they be built in New Zealand versus the offshore ones,
sustainment, replacement, interaction to service, some of those things.
But we'll have plenty of time today.
I'd just like to start with some sort of broader overview in line with the comments
you've just made, and then we can have a chance to maybe drill into the Type
3, just as one example-
Sure
... to understand, I guess, fleet processes, because as you say, it's been quite
topical.
I think one of the aims of this is just to increase public and parliamentary
confidence in FENZ.
Nothing is going to fix vehicles or magic up new vehicles overnight.
But I think it presents an opportunity to build confidence in FENZ and leadership,
and to demonstrate that the issues are well understood, that plans are in place,
even if they take time to work through, so.
But as you say, we're here in large part because of the conflicting, concerning,
and confusing answers that we've been given
over the last few hearings, particularly with that tranche two of MAN cabs.
We held an extra hearing in March because, which is quite unusual in
itself. So where were you both at that meeting?
Pardon?
Where were you both at the last meeting in March?
So we made
what we thought at the time was the right decision to send the people with the
detail to that meeting, understanding that you wanted further detail specifically
around those areas and issues that had been discussed in the previous meeting.
And given the short timeframe, we assumed that that would be the right people to
send. So in hindsight, we know that was not received well,
but that was our decision at the time.
There was a perception that those staff got thrown under the bus.
How do you respond to that?
Wasn't the intention at all. They are the experts in that field, and they have the
detail.
Did it bring the clarification that we were
hoping for?
Well, given that we're here today, no.
I think we've got to give you more, and we need to help take the committee on the
journey for that.
So as board chair, have you been asking the same questions that we've been
asking as a select committee?
Absolutely. The board in its entirety, long before
the inquiry was commenced, have worked hard on the fleet
progress. We have a financial and investment sustainability committee, which I'm
pretty sure I've talked to you about before, which has taken part of
the fleet deep dive into that subcommittee.
And we are aware of the challenges.
We're also aware of our fiscal responsibility and the envelope in which we are
operating. We've spent a lot of time as an organization sitting up asset
management plans to make sure we are looking at our fleet in an appropriate way,
and spent a lot of time looking at what is appropriate for the organization.
So you've been asking the same questions. Have you been getting the same answers?
Yes.
And you're not concerned about answers that we've been given?
We are concerned.
No, but are you concerned that the answers we've been getting are wrong and you've
been getting the same answers?
So there was definitely some confusion at those previous meetings, and I think,
Kerry, you've got some clarification on that.
Would you like to go through that, particularly on those MAN 3s and the 30 trucks?
We'll come to that in a minute. But my question is, you're not concerned that the
answers we're getting is wrong and-
I'm concerned that there's been some confusion in the answers that are given, but
the answers that we've, or questions that we have asked at board level and
subcommittee level, we've had the appropriate answers for.
So that's why we need to-
But you must have sat there and said, "Hang on a minute.
I think the wrong message is coming across." Because as you've just said,
you understood the situation. So surely at that point, either
you're going to jump in or you're going to write to the committee afterwards and
go, "Hang on a minute. I think we got that one wrong."
And that hasn't happened.
There was some correspondence back to the committee, which we talked about.
We clarified certain things.
Yes. Yeah, absolutely. Was concerned about the confusion, for sure.
Okay.
Right. So let's just take one example then.
We've obviously heard a bit about are there any trucks on the road.
I think we all understand today none of the tranche two trucks are on the road,
but they will be by July.
Not all 30, but the first lot will be by July.
Yeah.
I can take you through the whole process, if you like, through that.
Certainly, our aim is to have them on by July, but there are some issues
that we're dealing with that may push them past July, but they'll
certainly be on-
Sure. But let's just take as one example, how many in that first
wave that we were hoping for July, plus or minus the issues that might
delay it a few, but-
So the 16 that, if you have a look at the green sheet here
that we supplied.
Yeah. But it is 16 or 17.
Well, it might pay if I take you through the context to
clarify the confusion.
Yeah.
Because we have got stuck in the past in giving the committee real
clarity on actually the numbers and the makeup between those.
So I think if you-
If you allow me just to give you a quick context of how that evolved, it'll bring a
lot more clarity across the numbers. That would be helpful.
Yeah. But just before we do that.
Yeah.
Here's the reason I'm asking this.
At the last meeting, the one that
we're here for,
we had this exact question of was it '16 or '17.
Yeah.
And I thought it was pretty clear from your
pre-hearing answers and your post-hearing and your review answers that it was
17, including the trial appliance
of the AngloCo Man Cab Tranche 2, pipe
three.
And I was told, "No, no, no. It's '16." And I specifically said,
"Are you sure it's not '17?" The written answer here say '17, very clear.
And it's not '16.
And if
the culture, we'll start with the board because we're going to come to officer
command in a minute.
But if the culture within the board is, "No, no, we're out of transparency, we're
putting everything right."
And you can see something as clear as that where I specifically say, "Is it '16 or
'17?" "No, it's only '16." What's happened to the other
tranche? And we can't get an answer.
Surely at that point,
you could just send us a note and go, "Well, it's 16 are the ones that were built
up. So last year, plus there's the trial appliance.
That's the 17th."
Mm-hmm.
Better referring to that.
We're just not seeing that kind of proactive approach.
Sure. Understood.
And I think that's what's creating concern.
Yeah.
But I'm not seeing a proactive approach out of the boards who are
appointed as the public's representatives
to oversee things from a government position.
Sure. So today we have the answers to those.
And I think I'd like, if possible to, is the team-
No, that's good
... to go through that.
I'm great. But we shouldn't have had to come here today to get those answers,
should we?
No.
So my question to the board is what have you been doing all this time?
So we've spent, as I talked you through before, a lot of time looking at fleet.
And we are aware of some of the challenges in terms of the miscommunication at this
committee level. Hence the reason we need the opportunity now to give you this
detail, and we would really like that opportunity to take you through, particularly
this era,
so we can make sure that we are all on the same page and that we can move forward.
Thank you. We'll do that now. Okay. Thank you.
Gary, if you want to take us through that.
Yeah. And some of that lack of clarity has come from bouncing the
numbers, and from our side, bouncing the numbers, when we
were very into different phases or aspects of it.
And that's why I want to give some real clarity to it.
So in 2019, we ordered 30 Man
cab chassis.
And then in October 2019, we identified
the structural body cracking in 28 of the 47 Man
Fraser type threes, which had been operationally deployed at that time from
previous procurement.
So following that, decision was made to pause the further
production of any type threes until a solution had been
identified for the cracking. The pause is actually
quite pivotal in the long term of what's, then this
process has dragged on for multiple years.
So just to be clear on that point then, can you just give me the date,
right back at the start, when did Tranche 2 start?
Tranche 2, so the 30 appliances?
Yes.
So in August 2019, we ordered the 30
Man cab chassis.
Right. So it didn't start at the end of 2023?
I'll get to that, the phase in '23.
No, no, I just want to confirm that when Tranche 2 started, so it was
2019.
Well, it depends what-
The slide in '21 would be helpful as well, Mr.
Costa, if that page gives you the timeline.
Oh, yeah, I just had someone draw me up one, and it starts-
Yeah
... here nicely at December 2023.
So in '23, what we did at that stage, and there's a
step that comes before that, so I would appreciate if you'd let me go through it
because it will become clear.
Yeah.
But in '23, that's when we went to AngloCo to
design further 28 build. So 28 of those
chassis that were bought in 2019. Of the
30 chassis,
28 of them we went to AngloCo to design those, and that's what you're referring
to as Tranche 2.
So it started at '23 or 2019?
That's what I'm saying, that's-
Started in 2019.
That's why we need to go through in a sequential point or it
won't, it'll become confusing.
Yeah.
So 2019-
It does, because do you recognize this?
I do recognize that.
Yeah. It's what you gave us at the last hearing.
Yep.
To kind of assuage our concerns, and it specifically says, "Tranche 2 starts in
December 2023."
That is when we gave the-
Chassis
... 28 chassis to AngloCo to design the appliances that are
coming on.
So it's skipped four years of history,
hasn't it?
Is that-
It specifically says
it starts in... There's a little code, Tranche 2.
It's only Tranche 1 up until here.
Yeah. So what I'm trying to do today is give the committee real clarity
around the timeline to put you through that.
So not going back at what's been supplied in the past, but giving,
and not saying that's wrong, it's actually filling the gaps where there are gaps
in there.
Okay. It's not wrong, it's just not been answered.
So but can you, I think you've skipped a bit.
So you got to,
you had the cracking issue.
Yep.
In the meantime, you were also running your next generation type three project,
and you've gone out for RFPs for that.
Mm-hmm.
So how did you select AngloCo in 2023 to
build the remaining 28?
Okay, so following that decision to pause
the type threes.
Mm-hmm.
And that took longer than anticipated.
It wasn't until 2021 that a decision was made
to send one of the 30 Man chassis that we'd bought in
2019 to AngloCo, and one of
those chassis to SEM. And that was to design a
different prototype for the body build through there.
But how are they selected?
So that was two of those originally
30 Man chassis.
Yeah, but how were SEM and AngloCo selected?
Oh, they've selected through the procurement process to sort of identify-
They're the ones that responded to an RFP or something, did they?
I'd have to come back with that detail.
I haven't gone into the detail of what happened back at that stage.
Does anyone in the room know? Because as I understand-
Darryl should know. Yes, Darryl has some notes on it.
Did SCM put in an RFP for the next generation?
So, the process we undertook was, because we had a
panel for the next generation Type 3s, we sought external
advice, and following that advice,
we approached a few of the suppliers who were on the panel
for the next generation Type 3 and asked them if they could rapidly
fill the build on the main chassis so that we wouldn't have
a gap. The intention was we wouldn't have a gap in the production Type 3, so that's
how that occurred. We sought advice and followed that advice.
So that makes sense. But SCM definitely then had put in an RFP for next
generation Type 3.
Correct. So separate process, if you like.
Yeah.
But we're drawing on that panel of suppliers that we've gone to market for, for the
next generations to do this short-term build on the main chassis.
So any information that said that there'd only been four RFPs
being
Scania,
AngloCo,
Scania NZ with Fraser Fire, Emergency One, but not
SCM, that SCM had not put in
a RFP for the next generation, that would be incorrect, would it?
I'd need to come back to you on that.
Right. Because otherwise, it just kind of looked like, get the AngloCo piece,
they'd put in an RFP. But if SCM hadn't, it looks like they've been plucked out
of thin air.
I'd need to clarify that detail with you. Happy to do that.
Okay.
Great. Thank you.
Mm-hmm.
Okay, and with that, can we just finish this chronology?
Yeah, can we just finish this bit off?
Yeah.
Thank you.
So, obviously at that stage, we went out to those
two suppliers and then provided them one of each of those 30
chassis.
And so then in
2023,
we went to AngloCo's design and asked them to build a further 28.
So that was after
seeing the design elements through that.
So-
Do you test them as part of that when you selected AngloCo from the two?
You've now got two trial appliances.
Mm-hmm.
Do they get tested?
My understanding was the delays that were taken with
SCM
were just too long in actually being able to bring a
prototype to fruition.
And the contract was then provided to AngloCo
on the basis of
the design that they'd provided through the...
That could meet the spec.
So the AngloCo one wasn't tested before it was selected.
I would have to check that detail, too.
Do you know how long that AngloCo test one spent in the workshops over the
two years after it arrived broken?
Do you know, Darryl?
No, I don't.
No, we'd have to come back to that too.
We don't know that either.
Okay.
So that was back in 2023.
And so they were asked to build a further 28, and that's where the number
changes from the 30 to the 28 because two are in prototypes.
Of those 28, we received 16 appliances, which
are going through the various stages to allow them to be put into operational use.
And that was 16 that are shown here above the black line.
So they have the 16. The two below the black line are the two prototypes.
To be clear, right now, of all of those appliances,
none of them are in operational use.
They're still, as you can see from the lines and the process they go through,
in various stages of the pipe.
So the remaining 12, so that's 18 from the
16 under 2. So the remaining 12 from those original 30,
they haven't been received yet by foreign emergencies.
What that means is we haven't taken ownership of those appliances.
They're still going through the build process. They're in New Zealand.
I traveled up to Auckland myself to have a look at those and we cite that the 12
are in New Zealand, but they're still going through that build phase
before we will accept ownership of those.
I know you're going to ask me about the timeline for those
12 as well.
I need to make sure that before we take ownership that we're balancing
up the expediency and also making
the contractual suitability of those.
So we want to make sure that
all of the contractual obligations actually have been met before we
receive and take ownership of those things.
And we have found
through our operational
deployment checks as we take them through from receiving them to put them into
operational use, a number of issues that have come out through there
that currently are being rectified by the supplier.
So we're actually holding the supplier to account to rectify
those issues.
It gives me assurance that our operational process that we
go through before we put them in deployment from when we receive them is picking up
those, and the supplier's working really proactively and
positively with us in rectifying any of those issues that are coming up.
And the SCM trial truck, will that go into service?
The SCM trial truck, it will go into service.
Currently, that's destined to go to New Plymouth.
And the-
Does it come with all the sort of requisite manuals and things that you'd expect?
Do the what, sorry?
Come with all the sort of requisite manuals for the appliance that you would
expect?
I don't have that detail, but I'll certainly assume it would.
Okay. I'm just going to check, Melissa, was yours a sub?
A sub, yeah.
Okay.
So does that mean I-
Yeah, you can go now.
Thank you.
Sorry.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just want to go back to the two
prototypes that you actually talked about.
So they have actually gone out to the
two different companies to build.
Correct.
And you count the 16.
So you actually count, hang on, two chassis.
So out of the 30, you now are left with 22 because you've got two
prototypes. What happens to those two prototypes?
Even though they were actually gone out to be built by two separate
companies-
They're still going to be used
... do they actually come back to you as part of the fleet?
Yes.
They do, yeah.
So one of those prototypes will be going to Rotorua and one will be going to New
Plymouth.
So they are actually coming back, so that is included.
So you now have 12 that haven't actually been received by FENZ.
Correct.
Sir, you actually initially talked about the concern for the age of the
fleet.
Mm-hmm.
So when we have actually received the vehicle,
we've ordered it in 2019,
you haven't actually received this 12, and none of these
vehicles are operational. So how old would you class those
vehicle as when you're calculating the age of the fleet?
Oh, so-
So are they-
Yeah. It's up to you.
Yeah.
So this is 2026. You ordered them in
2019.
Mm-hmm.
It's been in the country for seven years, and it's aged,
as far as most people are concerned, when you purchase a car or anything else.
So how would you classify their age when you're actually calculating the age of
the fleet?
We'd classify the age of it from when we receive it, which is
when the total build is finished. So the appliances that
aren't actually fully built and compliant and ready
to be deployed on the road until they're built.
I would say that's the same of most vehicles.
So if you would actually... I'll give you an example.
If you purchase a car on the market right now and you actually parked it in the
garage for seven years, how old would you actually classify that car as?
It's too-
And what I'd say-
Would you call it brand new?
If I-
Or would you call it seven years old?
If I broke down the components of that car, I would have no idea of how old the
components-
No, that wasn't the question. You purchase a car today, brand new, no, back in
2019, and you parked it in the car and not used it,
and how old would you classify that car as?
Would you call it brand new or would you call it seven years old?
Well, I think we're not comparing apples with apples.
Well, it's a vehicle.
Yeah.
It's a machinery that hasn't been used.
It's still in the build phase.
There are technologies that progress. It's seven years.
Yeah.
So you're calling it brand new, are you?
I would class a vehicle brand new from the time that it's completed its build
process.
Wow.
Yes.
But it's not the build, it's not the vehicle that's being built, it's actually-
We've got another couple of subs.
Somebody hasn't finished the car in your garage, that's the issue.
We've got a couple of subs. So one from Andy and then one from Mike, and then I'm
going to-
Yeah, look, and tell me whether you want me to come back to this.
No.
So just having gone now through this document that you've given
us,
if you look at the age of the fleet-
Yeah
... basically what you're saying is you're keeping up with Type 1, 2 rural tankers,
special fleets. They're more or less the same.
But in the aerials and Type 3s,
they're just going worse-
Yes
... the whole time, and it's gotten worse and worse-
Yep
... at the moment. So I think what we're looking for is some maturity.
We got to actually get on top of
that because I think the number of vehicles you have commissioned,
Type 3s you've commissioned, is
four, is it?
What page was that on?
But since 2017-
Yeah
... you've essentially commissioned virtually nothing.
Yeah. Type 3s.
Yeah.
The Type 3s, yes.
Yeah. Okay. So then you've got some information later on in
this about essentially the funding deficit.
Mm-hmm.
Can you just talk us through what that actually means?
So you've got these investment gaps
for all appliances.
Mm-hmm.
Can you just walk us through what that graph actually means?
Andy, would it be possible to come back to that because-
Well, I was wondering whether you want to come back-
Yeah. I think-
... because this is quite a big area for you
... I think that, yes, it is.
Okay. No, I finally-
So can we come back to that? And-
But I do want to come back to that because that's-
Yes.
We'll hold that thought.
No, can we hold that-
That's the heart of it. Yeah
... and come back to it?
Yeah.
Because I think that we need to carry on with what we were talking about.
Okay. I just want to get to a high level.
No, that's all good. Thank you. Mike.
Thank you. I just want to quickly touch on, I guess, the cab
chassis that were ordered in 2000, or arrived in
2019, and obviously are still sitting there.
And my question around that is just around the warranty
for those
chassis. And actually, what is the warranty of it?
And are we basically seven years through that?
And how does that affect it?
Have you got the info on the warranty?
No.
Yeah. We will have to come back to you on that.
Haven't got the detail of-
Specific
... what you need today, the specifics, and I don't want to lead the committee
astray with incorrect information.
Yeah.
Sorry, but that's not really good enough, is it?
The board chair sat here and said we've counted eight, specifically a carrier to
Type 3.
Yep.
You can't tell me if it's the input in a RFP is,
and how they were chosen. You can't tell Mr.
Davidson, if the warranty is in use.
You can't tell us exactly how it's passed.
There is-
Isn't that the point of today?
Yeah. The warranty is in place. What I
don't want to give the detail on is the specifics of when the warranty started,
and that's the question that I'm hearing from Mr. Davidson.
Yeah. When it started, when it expires.
Yeah.
And the insurance.
Yeah. So I want to be accurate on that with the committee.
I don't want to guess and
revert to memory as to what that says.
So the only reason I'm not giving the exact clarity is I want to be
precise because we've confused the committee before by incorrect or misses
or information.
It's true.
We want to be clear.
It's not an excuse to avoid the question though, is it?
I'm not avoiding the question.
It's not avoiding the question.
But we'll come back with the answer. Just want to be accurate with the answer.
Thank you. Okay, Lamonga, and then I'll come to Andy if there's no more subs
around the-
Thank you. I've been really listening intently
to the questions, but also your answers, because it's really important to
understand the operating reality
and specifically how,
over time, the new trucks have arrived,
then they haven't been in operation.
So in terms of the operating reality-
Yeah
... because this process, we've received a number of
submissions from very concerned, not just members of the public, but also your
workforce.
Mm-hmm.
So I want to go back to the operating reality, where you've
got hundreds of sites and then you've got this problem
of
workforce requiring the equipment, and you haven't got fire trucks in.
All of us have received lots of concerns around the breakdowns, not just from the
workforce, specifically from the public.
Mm.
What is the strategy moving forward?
You are going to come back to us with specific data that's going to be
helpful. What is the operating reality from here on in towards the end of the
year? Because I'm really concerned when you have truck breakdowns, you've got
firefighters sitting on the side of the road waiting for things to be updated.
So can you help us understand what is the
contingency plan that you have in place?
Not just the numbers, but the reality, the operating reality which
the Chair openly incomes.
Sure. Yeah.
That's a better question.
Yeah. So
with regard to that,
we don't minimize the impact at a local level at
all. Both Megan and myself have been
operational firefighters. We understand, when an appliance
breaks down, how devastating that is at a local level
around being able to respond to support your community.
So, that's not minimized at all. There's two things I'll
get Megan to speak in a minute about our network,
because we don't operate on a station-by-station basis.
We
operate on a network basis, which
ensures that we can respond to communities.
But I do take you to this slide number 13 in your pack.
And
the reason for this slide in the pack isn't to
belittle the impact at a local level, it's to
actually show at a system level what it looks like.
So
99.72% of the time,
we respond to the calls, and that's based from
2001 to 2025, which shows the impact of
any mechanical issue you've experienced between the time of a
call is given at a station and the time that it responds back
to
get on station and recommission again.
So what this is trying to show is the
reality of the system actually working in place rather than any
given appliance breaking down at any given time.
So the high-level statement that I would make in there is that
mechanical breakdowns don't equate to inability to
service communities and to respond to appliances.
This is limited to that period. It doesn't mean that
there's not other appliances that are unavailable at that time.
It's about a system level network.
Megan, do you just want to talk a little bit about what happens when appliance does
break down in these slides?
Sure. So what you're seeing here is those
figures relate to appliances that have been
assigned to a working job. And what Kerry has pointed
out, the CE has pointed out, is 99.72% of the
time, those vehicles that are assigned to a job
turn out to that job.
If a vehicle, and in this instance, you can see there were
98 times that an appliance,
in 2025,
couldn't go out of the station.
There are very few occurrences in our
paid network where only one
appliance is assigned to
a job. So we have 1,267
appliances across our whole country.
That is a network of appliances,
and very few times is only one appliance sent.
So if in those 98 times
a truck couldn't turn out, there is already another truck en
route. Now, that doesn't mean it is not frustrating for us.
There is nothing worse as a firefighter to hop into a truck and you
can't roll out the door. I understand that.
But when we talk about serving our community, we've got a network,
and there are many reasons a truck can't
be assigned. They could be at an ongoing job, so we have to use the network
to get to the next job. So if you imagine 1,200 trucks placed
across the country,
if we need 10 of them to go to a factory fire, we don't leave
the station that they've gone from vacant.
We move trucks in and cover that. We create a coverage network.
I think what we're seeing
here is a result of the age of our fleet.
The plans we have in play for procurement is recognizing
the older
the fleet is, the more you have to maintain it,
and we need to get those numbers down.
We hear our firefighters, and I agree with them. I am a firefighter.
The age of the fleet needs to be reduced.
Can I ask a sub to that, please? On this
graph, and I read this last night and I see that it says there the
results need to be treated with care,
but it is going up. And what does
2026 show in comparison? So what are the data this
year? Is it going up as well?
Is it increasing than-
We can bring that data back to the committee.
But the essence is as a fleet gets older, it's going
to require more maintenance. Like Megan said, we're very
wholeheartedly, we need to bring the age profile of our fleet down,
which will reduce the maintenance of the fleet as a result of that.
But we'll certainly expect to see that graph continuing to
rise as we try to bring that-
Until it comes down.
Yeah.
Okay, thank you.
Jim.
He's got a sub on that.
Thank you.
Yeah.
What are your performance metrics for the supplier?
How often do you review and report them, and how are they performing?
That's a good question.
Yeah, so
we can bring you the detail around that if you want the detail on that, but we
certainly hold our suppliers account
to delivery. There's been multiple
issues through there with the suppliers and the delivery and
the timelines that we've put in place with, that they haven't been able to meet,
and some of those have been outside of our control, outside of
their control, such as supply issues and the like.
But certainly, the length of procurement is far outside
what we think is acceptable,
and been working really strongly with the
suppliers to hold them to account around the delivery times
that they have in place.
And have you entertained changing the supplier?
Well, we have contractual issues with them for a start,
and the end-to-end process from design to
the build of an appliance is roughly around 18 months.
So,
changing suppliers is not quick. We can't just go and buy one off the shelf.
And so really conscious in making a decision to change supplier,
that's a big call in the pause of supply chain going through.
To insulate. Where do you report the performance against in metrics?
Is it an annual report or whereabouts is that visible?
We don't report performance of those at a
government level.
So maybe you could report the current status to this committee maybe.
Mm-hmm.
See if something's there afterwards.
That's what the committee wants, yes.
Was that a sub?
Yeah.
So thanks for this information. I'm just trying to get my head around it.
First of all, obviously, you've pointed out to
99.72% of the time the fleet's been
available.
Does that include actually
being able to be rolled out of the station bay?
Because obviously, I've heard of times when
the fleet can't leave because there's not enough staff
in there. So does that take that into account as well?
This is breakdown.
Just breakdown.
Yeah.
Use this one.
If you turn to slide 14,
do you want to just talk a little bit, 14, Megan?
Sure. This might just help you have context around
the network and availability. So what you have there
is the power of our network is it has to be able to
search for major events, but also be able to
deal with our everyday business. That graph demonstrates
that on average, about 30% of our fleet is
used at any one time.
We need the capacity for those major events, and you can see, for
example, in 2019, that sky
tower fire, we went right up to just under 60% of our
network was used.
That indicates to you that if a truck is off the run, there is a
lot of capacity within the network to deal with
incidents.
Now, the rest of the time, our firefighters are doing our prevention
work, working with schools, doing inspections, their
training,
so that's not an indication of
activity. What it is, is saying how often are our trucks used at any
one time. I think that gives you some context about what happens
when a truck's off the run and how the network can support that.
I think just adding to that as well, this graph talks to
response. That's not the only thing that our firefighters do on a daily
basis, obviously. So, it doesn't talk to
the full utilization, but whenever there's a call, we
will drop the other things to respond to fire.
So this gives our capacity to respond.
Okay.
I'm sorry, just-
Yeah, no, one more, and then I'm going to Melissa, and then Andrew.
Yeah.
So the 246, I've asked questions in the
past
of the minister about a national defect
reporting system, which to try and get the data on actually the
amount of
breakdowns there has been, and the response was there is no
system to actually capture that data,
and that a new one was apparently being
designed and put in place. But the data does
exist?
No. So if you go to the first slide of your pack, it talks
about some of the data caveats in there.
Yeah.
So, on the request of this committee for that information,
we've had a full team who have been scouring through
all of our information and data to manually pull all this
together. So one of the things that we didn't
inherit as an organization was the modernization of all of
our IT systems. That's another
capital challenge that we have for the organization facing us as part of our
investment challenge. But the reason
this data is here today,
is because we've had teams of people pulling it together manually.
Okay. So
is it likely that it's more than 246?
Well, I'm confident with the work that's gone into this to have
as accurate picture as possible for the committee today from what we've got.
But is it, sorry, I'm just trying to...
work out because you can see it trending up.
Yeah.
I'm just trying to work out, like you've-
Okay
... pulled through the data and you're saying 246, but is it likely to be greater
than 246 considering we don't actually have a proper
system to-
Do you have a-
I'm fairly confident. I think you would've seen the social media posts
tracking truck breakdowns just as I have.
Yeah.
This kind of is at pace, with what's being
put up on social media. So that gives me a level of confidence that what
our-
Yeah
... firefighters are reporting publicly, we've captured here.
So that gives me some level-
And does 246 give you confidence in what's-
I believe those figures we've gone through manually and that is accurate.
Okay.
I do believe part of our planning,
carrying out-
Oh, sorry. You didn't quite understand my question.
Does 246 give you confidence in your fleet?
It's reflective of the age of the fleet.
Yeah. I think when you look at the size of the fleet, and like I say,
the measure is about the capability that we're deploying into
communities and are we responding to the community.
So when the confidence comes from the other graph that we
showed you about the response, the ability to respond into
communities and meeting those times.
So you're saying your fleet's a well-maintained serviced fleet?
I'd say it's reflective of a fleet of our age and
size across the country. Yeah.
Thank you. Melissa?
Part of the question that I had was this very issue in terms of
identifying the
failures or breakdowns or issues that you've actually got.
You're talking about analysis as you're saying, computer-aided
dispatch data. But
do you think you're actually capturing all of the faults that our
firefighters are actually facing with their equipment?
The reason I actually ask that, I was shocked to actually find out that you
actually have no process apart from a logbook as such
that they handwrite. And who actually monitors those and
how are they actually reported so that the management, the
board, can actually understand exactly what kind of trouble that they've actually
got with their equipment?
So before I hand a direct answer to the question, we're well aware that our
computer systems are antiquated, and we've been very clear and for many years that
we need to upgrade those. The first one we are completing this year, and we don't
have capacity as an organization, both financially or
human people-wise, to do two large projects in the one time.
So it is scheduled, and it's scheduled after the one we're currently delivering in
HRIS. So the systems are antiquated, and there's no
story otherwise. But can you answer specifically to that question?
Yeah, so that is why the data we've supplied is
based on our
CAD system, so our communication system, because we can track
that accurately from when an appliance is deployed
as to whether or not it makes it to the
incident and whether it gets home again.
So that's accurate because that comes through a message from the
firefighters directly into our communication center, and it's captured on there,
whether or not that's managed to complete the thing.
And from that data,
that shows that 99 point-
... 72% of the time, that we're responding and completing the task.
So when you have an equipment that consistently fails-
Mm
... and it is actually dispatched for a fire, like
Lofus Lodge fire.
Mm-hmm.
And the first truck that actually got there,
it was inoperable. It didn't work.
Mm-hmm.
And the firefighters are standing there, and the fire's actually
happening right before their eyes.
How do you think they feel, and how do you feel when that actually
happens?
That's-
When it should have been, it should have actually
worked. It wasn't working.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah, that, I mean-
And whose fault was it?
That is gut-wrenching. And the
firefighters would've been devastated in that situation.
But there's no fire service around the world that can
guarantee that any appliance on any given day can
make it to a fire. There's various reasons
why they may or may not make that.
When we lift that up to a system level and we ensure that the
adequacy of the system to keep people safe,
and have confidence at that level,
that doesn't
in any way negate there will be times when the system
can't support it at a local level, and the impact of that at a local level
is devastating.
Well, that truck actually arrived at Lofus Lodge.
It just did not work when they got there.
Correct.
Okay, thank you. We're going to move now to Andy, because I did say we'd get there
before 9:00 p.m. So Andy.
Right. Okay.
Over to you.
First of all, we're going to start off with page 13, so those key metrics of
arrival. So clearly the number of vehicles that did not get to
and function when they got there has gone up markedly.
Mm.
What I would like to know from that is the percentage of those, if you've got any
data about which vehicles are failing.
Because, I mean, if you look at the numbers you've given us, essentially you're
maintaining the-
Mm.
You know, the type ones, the type twos,
tankers. Those ones, you're basically maintaining them as pretty much as they were
when you got them in 2017. But it's the type three, four
and the five and sixes.
Sure. So you want the percentage.
Which
are now all at-
Yeah
... the age they should be replaced or above on average.
Yeah.
Pretty all, or five, sixes, I think you gave them 20.
Yeah, they are all up, or they're about to get there. So do you have any feel?
Because I'm really trying to get a feel for if those numbers are going up like
that.
Yeah.
Starting to go up like that, is that gonna be sustained in that way?
And what proportion of that relates to aged fleet?
Yeah.
Because that's not clear in here.
Well, we'd have to
come back.
We can come back with the data.
Okay.
I mean, obviously, you would expect that the type threes,
which are the
higher age bracket-
Yeah
... and also heavy use in being situated in
our major urban centersUm, would have a higher
proportion of it.
Yeah.
But we'll give you the exact detail on that in that-
Okay. That'd be really useful because, ultimately,
what we're interested in is the fleet actually being able to do its job.
You're correct. Yeah.
Being able to get there and do its job, and if it's not, and it's going to get
worse, then we really need to know.
Yeah.
Okay. So, leading on from that, let's focus on the Type
Threes. So, essentially, if I read the numbers
right, you've got 196 Type Threes in the fleet at the moment.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah. Their average age or the average lifespan should be 20
years.
Mm-hmm.
So you should basically be replacing 10 a year.
That's the target.
Yeah, okay. So since 2017, other than that we had the hangover of the
MAN ones, which was 47, which were ordered in 2015
and sort of, I presume, came through the process by 2018.
But since then, effectively, until
last year, you'd ordered four
and you should've been ordering 10 a year. How did we get into that position?
So before I had to-
What on earth is going on with-
Before I hand to Kerry on that one,
with our amalgamation in 2017, the direction from cabinet at the time
was very clear that we needed to invest in our rural fleet.
Yeah.
And so that's where the investment has gone.
And like any business, it prioritizes what it needs to spend within a fiscal
envelope. We needed to bring them up to speed first.
So that has been
done, and now we are moving on to our Type Threes and our Aerials.
So that's why there has been the delay in that space.
Okay.
Do you want to add anything, Rich?
Yeah.
Okay, go on, and then I'll-
Yeah. Okay. Yeah. So, there was a real focus on that.
So that was the prioritization to actually
lift the
rural fleet and tankers and the like.
With the Type Threes though, specifically, where the
complication came for the organization was with the
MAN appliances are cracking. So that's where, from there
forward, it started-
That was the ones which you ordered 2015 to '18.
Yep.
So that feels like it's paralyzed the organization in terms of responding to
saying, "Well, yeah, okay, we've got those ones cracking.
We've got to fix those."
Yeah. So the key-
But then there's nothing else.
Yeah, so the key point in history there is back in
2019, when the
decision was made to pause until a solution was
made for the cracking appliances.
And I can see in hindsight that based on that decision would've been the
context and the thinking of, we don't want to build any new appliances which are
just going to crack in the same way until we've got it fixed.
Even if it's a different supplier, they may be doing it a different way.
Well, the
contract at that time was with Fraser Fire.
And so working with them to try and find a solution, that took far
longer than anyone would've envisaged through there.
And that was where the start of the
lack of investment into the Type Threes actually
started.
So what you're telling me is that effectively FENZ was kind of saying, "We've got
this problem with the ones which we've already ordered.
We know that we've got a fleet which will start to age, but then we don't actually
still order any more?"
The organization paused the production of those 30
chassis,
and that didn't
eventuate for a number of years till we, like I said before, we went
to SEM and AngloCo to build a prototype and a different type of-
So in hindsight, should the organization have done that earlier and
said, "Well, okay, we've got a problem there.
We've got to sort out the Fraser MAN one."
Mm.
"But we should recognize that a good asset..." You know, only recently got
that decent asset management plan, as I understand it.
Yep.
So you should've been still ordering, even if, said, "Well, we're not going back to
you guys. We'll go and find somebody else," because they're not the only-
Yeah
... manufacturer in the world.
Yeah. Certainly, in hindsight, looking back at
2019, that decision to pause has been quite
momentous-
Yes
... in the situation we find ourselves in today.
Yeah. So it should've been revisited. Okay.
You
told us the Cabinet said, "Please, can you go and focus on
rurals and-
Yep
... Volunteer Brigade and so on."
Did at any stage the organization say to Cabinet, "Hey, that's
good. We'll try and keep doing that.
But we actually do need to invest in the Type Threes and the Aerials as well."
Did the organization push back saying, "Hang on.
You're setting up a bow wave of a problem."
We still had a prioritization issue, but I'll... Carry on.
Yeah, that was the focus and that was the prioritization.
The issue, with the Type Threes,
didn't necessarily come from that focus and prioritization.
It came from the issue to pause.
Yeah. No. It
should be reasonably obvious that if you've got a fleet that's aging at the
rate it is-
Yep
... as I said, it's pretty obvious, it's kind of maths, that you are going to have
an issue.
Yep.
At any stage did the organization wave a flag at Cabinet and say, or the minister,
and say, "Hey, we actually do need to invest in some Type Threes and some Aerials
as well, but let's focus on Type Threes.
We need to invest in those because otherwise this fleet is getting older and older
and older." You can see it. Your data's very clear here.
Presumably you did know that before providing this data.
Mm.
Yes?
So did at any stage the organization push back on Cabinet and say, "Hey,
here's the numbers. We are going to need to invest in Type Three as well."
Darrell, did you have anything on that process of-
No. We didn't push back.
Yep. Wow.
But we've been clear about our requirements for capital.
Well, if you-
We didn't push back.
If you've been clear about your requirements for capital and you didn't push back,
I'm not reconciling those two things.
Well, if the-
Who were you clear to?
The pushback on the Type Threes that you're talking about?
Yes.
Yeah. So, they're two separate things in a way.
So one is the prioritization in the early years on the
Type One, Type Two things.
Yes.
The plan-
Yeah
... at the time for the Type Threes was a constant steady
procurement. The procurement got held up by the pause.
That was the issue.
So it was nothing to do with any instruction being given by Cabinet.
It was-That was purely that the
organization kind of paralyzed itself.
But the issue, the instruction from cabinet was to give-
Sure
... the focus onto those rural aspects.
Yes.
So the organization was doing that.
Yes, I got that.
But alongside that, it had a plan of how it would maintain-
Okay, so-
... or do the best that it could to maintain within
the financial envelope.
Okay, so that is not a direction from Cabinet that's given you difficulty, it is
your own organization getting stuck with the original-
Cabinet didn't give the organization-
The type 3s
... the direction to pause on the type 3s.
So you couldn't-
So you could've done both.
You could've done both?
If the decision to pause hadn't been taken at that time.
You had the resources to do both.
We had the resources to keep balancing things.
We wouldn't have made as much
investment in the rural fleet if we were-
Oh, so it would've been a trade-off. Okay.
Andy, I've got a couple of sups on that.
Can I ask one more?
One more, because I want to get these into-
This is probably the most critical one that leads me to.
Yeah.
Which is, you've got the graphs there, and I'd really like you to explain those.
On the, essentially, the investment cap and deficit.
Can you just explain those? Because if they are what I think they are, there's a
real problem.
We'll keep walking through that.
Are you talking about slide 24, does that help?
Uh.
Or 23?
Probably is that.
Show me which one it is.
This one here?
Yep, those ones. Yep, 23.
All right. So I'm going to hand it to our CFO here.
Yeah, please.
Who will be able to take you through that.
Close. Okay. Yeah.
So slide 24 shows what the next 10 years looks like
if we are able to bring the whole fleet inside target age.
What it shows is that the organization can fund
356 million over the next 10 years based on its full financial
projections, but cannot fund 154
million
of the total 510 million required to bring our total fleet
inside target life over the next 10 years.
So being really blunt about this, what that means is you were saying that
you don't have enough money, and you can't deliver what is needed to maintain the
asset.
No, it's not what it's saying.
Okay, what is it saying?
What it's saying is, in order to bring the total
fleet inside target life over the next 10 years, we're
short of 154 million to be able to do that.
I think that's just what-
We seem to maintain-
I think that's just what I said.
Ah, well.
You're short of that money.
Well-
So what-
It's renewing the fleet as opposed to maintaining the fleet.
We will continue to maintain the fleet.
Yes, got that.
But in order to bring the total fleet inside target life over 10
years, we're short of 154 million. That's what it says.
So you do not have enough money to essentially to have the asset, I shouldn't have
used the word maintained, but you don't have enough money to have to, if you accept
asset management plan to be-
Renew
... short $154 million. So what is the advice that has been given
to the minister around, because we just tried to send
a new levy, and I've got an issue about the way the levies are set
and where the levies land, but property versus non-property, that's another issue.
But what advice have you been given back to the minister in terms of
setting levies to say, "Hey, over that period of time, this is not
enough money
to keep our fleet in the state that it should be in."
So we've been clear with the minister, with all of our information, the
asset management plans are the document that, of course, detail where this-
Yes
... where this comes from.
Yeah.
That has been shared at all levels.
And we have an opportunity on a rolling basis, of course, to contribute to what we
believe we might need in terms of the levy base, but ultimately, it's the decision
that's taken from government.
And if we don't get, so last question then.
If we don't get to that 154, we still have an aging fleet across
the board.
It will be better, but-
But it won't be-
It still won't be completely inside target
... 100%
Right.
Righty-o, we've got two minutes left before the break.
Lamonga and Melissa, if we get time.
Go for it.
Very quickly. Thank you for that, just being really trying to understand the
rolling brief. My question is around urban.
So you've talked about the investment, cabinet decisions, et cetera.
But urban landscape has changed dramatically in terms of
building up small street, all sorts of those things.
What has been that discussion at the board table in terms of
where you sit, Greg and Megan, in terms of
requiring firefighters to get into those streets and respond to
all of the different activities when they happen?
Yeah, sure. So before I hand to Megan and to Greg to talk further, certainly
at the board level, we've been very clear that our communities are changing.
There's climate change challenges.
We have changes in the way our urban areas are developed, as you said, in
different ways, and therefore our equipment has to be able to meet those
requirements. So there's a big chunk of work that's gone on in the last two years
to look at our future operating capability and what we might need in those
regions to make sure that we can still deliver and
protect our communities. You want to add further on that?
Yeah, just
it's about being driven by the risk rather than the profile.
So, looking at the changing context across the country.
We're responding to weather events
every week at the moment it seems as different events hitting New
Zealand. So,
the challenge that we have within our assets is
how do we actually get into a position that allows us to
look at additional capability when we're, at the
moment, trying to maintain our current capability, which is
below life cycle. So, that is the investment challenge for us,
holding
really strongly to ensuring that we can deliver against our core primary
functions without building capability into areas that we can't
afford to
develop in there. But it's certainly a question for
the longer-term funding and
role of fire and emergency in some of those different activities with the
changing environment that's coming across with climate change.
Okay, Melissa.
Melissa.
In that very short time, you talked about in 2017,
government actually wanted you to focus on rural and delivery for the rural sums,
because wanting to know exactly what you've actually delivered and when you've
actually delivered those.
Yeah, certainly. Can I refer you to page 10?
Because I think that shows you the different types of investment we've
made in fleet since that time.
This does not include the current orders that we haven't
taken into operation. So this is just the fleet that we've put into
operations, Member Lee. So you can see there that there's
been a total of 318 new appliances put
into the system since
2017/18, and we've
broken it up there across the different types.
So type one and two, tanker and rural,
you can see that's where the focus has been.
There have been some specials, which are our support vehicles that
sit within the network that help move different equipment
around. But I think they're the figures
that address the question you've just asked.
Great. We're going to have to stop there, and if you've got follow-up, then you
can ask that after the break. And we will see you back.
Thank you very much for this evening.
Thank you.
I don't know how you felt, but that went fast for me.
It did.
So, we will see you after the 1:00 when the house
resumes at 1:00.
Sure.
So thank you very much.
Thank you.